This is from an email to a friend. We had been looking at http://www.eham.net/reviews/detail/2519

Hello Joe,

   Some time ago I sent you a link or something about Stepped charging ideas and products.

I am just going to rehash this a little here to help explain it and to see if I will gain an understanding also by explaining 
the steps.

Let's assume you have nothing of the sort that is smart enough to do this automatically.

What one can do is take some manual steps.

The first stage is the Bulk Charge. 
What this means is that with the battery connected to the charger, measure the voltage at the battery/charger to be 14.4 volts DC maximum.
Not all chargers are adjustable though so what can be done is to just monitor the voltage until this much appears on any reading taken.
(battery and charger connected) 
If this level can be achieved then it will do to just monitor the DC current. 
The amperage should go down as the battery charges up and when about 1 Amp is reached the charger should be disconnected.
Then the next step may be attempted. This stage supplies about 80% of the energy. 
This is mostly for deep cycle batteries.
Auto batteries may use other methods just to get the alternator to start supplying the charge. 

The next step is called Absorption Charge. 
With the battery disconnected the voltage should be set to 14.4 at the charger. 
This is where a regulated supply charger is the key. 
Only a 1 Amp regulated supply of 14.4 volts will be needed to complete this step. 
The voltage should maintain at this level if a reading is taken at the battery/charger connected points. 
This will give about 20% more energy as the bulk hopefully gave the 80% energy. 
One may periodically disconnect the charger and check the battery voltage to see if 13.2 volts (Max cell charge = 2.2 Volts x 6)is there and steady.
(Max cell charge)
The main difference in this stage is that we start out with 14.4 charging volts before the battery is connected. 
The previous step may need more voltage to achieve the 14.4 volts at the battery/charger connected reading. 
If this reading can not be reached with this type of charge, recheck the battery for cell PH and liquid levels then reattempt Bulk Charging.

The cells theoretical charges are 2.2 volts per cell. A lead acid battery will not keep this level for long without the next step.

The next step is Float Charge and the battery is usually maintained at this for standby as long as the power to the charger is on. 
Float voltage should be maintained at 13.4 Volts DC regulated at less than 1 Amp DC current. 
As can be seen the voltage is just 0.2 volts more than the 13.2 volt max cell charge. 
This will keep the battery ready for use in such cases as sump pumps or battery backup systems. 

If you have any batteries that are not connected to any charging systems their voltage is typically 12.56 with a
fully charged 12 volt 6 cell Pb H2SO4 type.

Always use safety equipment when working with chemical batteries. 
Gloves and safety goggles are recommended at least and aprons or some other protective clothing as well. 
It would be a good idea to put a towel over cell ports as well during the charging steps. 
Check fluid levels and PH with caution. 

I hope that these steps are clearer this way as those step types of chargers are a little expensive. 
